Documentation/virt/kvm/locking.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=================
KVM Lock Overview
=================

1. Acquisition Orders
---------------------

The acquisition orders for mutexes are as follows:

- kvm->lock is taken outside vcpu->mutex

- kvm->lock is taken outside kvm->slots_lock and kvm->irq_lock

- kvm->slots_lock is taken outside kvm->irq_lock, though acquiring
  them together is quite rare.

On x86:

- vcpu->mutex is taken outside kvm->arch.hyperv.hv_lock

- kvm->arch.mmu_lock is an rwlock.  kvm->arch.tdp_mmu_pages_lock is
  taken inside kvm->arch.mmu_lock, and cannot be taken without already
  holding kvm->arch.mmu_lock (typically with ``read_lock``, otherwise
  there's no need to take kvm->arch.tdp_mmu_pages_lock at all).

Everything else is a leaf: no other lock is taken inside the critical
sections.

2. Exception
------------

Fast page fault:

Fast page fault is the fast path which fixes the guest page fault out of
the mmu-lock on x86. Currently, the page fault can be fast in one of the
following two cases:

1. Access Tracking: The SPTE is not present, but it is marked for access
   tracking. That means we need to restore the saved R/X bits. This is
   described in more detail later below.

2. Write-Protection: The SPTE is present and the fault is caused by
   write-protect. That means we just need to change the W bit of the spte.

What we use to avoid all the race is the Host-writable bit and MMU-writable bit
on the spte:

- Host-writable means the gfn is writable in the host kernel page tables and in
  its KVM memslot.
- MMU-writable means the gfn is writable in the guest's mmu and it is not
  write-protected by shadow page write-protection.

On fast page fault path, we will use cmpxchg to atomically set the spte W
bit if spte.HOST_WRITEABLE = 1 and spte.WRITE_PROTECT = 1, to restore the saved
R/X bits if for an access-traced spte, or both. This is safe because whenever
changing these bits can be detected by cmpxchg.

But we need carefully check these cases:

1) The mapping from gfn to pfn

The mapping from gfn to pfn may be changed since we can only ensure the pfn
is not changed during cmpxchg. This is a ABA problem, for example, below case
will happen:

+------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| At the beginning::                                                     |
|                                                                        |
|	gpte = gfn1                                                      |
|	gfn1 is mapped to pfn1 on host                                   |
|	spte is the shadow page table entry corresponding with gpte and  |
|	spte = pfn1                                                      |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| On fast page fault path:                                               |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| CPU 0:                             | CPU 1:                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ::                                 |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|   old_spte = *spte;                |                                   |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                    | pfn1 is swapped out::             |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |    spte = 0;                      |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    | pfn1 is re-alloced for gfn2.      |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    | gpte is changed to point to       |
|                                    | gfn2 by the guest::               |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |    spte = pfn1;                   |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ::                                                                     |
|                                                                        |
|   if (cmpxchg(spte, old_spte, old_spte+W)                              |
|	mark_page_dirty(vcpu->kvm, gfn1)                                 |
|            OOPS!!!                                                     |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------+

We dirty-log for gfn1, that means gfn2 is lost in dirty-bitmap.

For direct sp, we can easily avoid it since the spte of direct sp is fixed
to gfn.  For indirect sp, we disabled fast page fault for simplicity.

A solution for indirect sp could be to pin the gfn, for example via
kvm_vcpu_gfn_to_pfn_atomic, before the cmpxchg.  After the pinning:

- We have held the refcount of pfn that means the pfn can not be freed and
  be reused for another gfn.
- The pfn is writable and therefore it cannot be shared between different gfns
  by KSM.

Then, we can ensure the dirty bitmaps is correctly set for a gfn.

2) Dirty bit tracking

In the origin code, the spte can be fast updated (non-atomically) if the
spte is read-only and the Accessed bit has already been set since the
Accessed bit and Dirty bit can not be lost.

But it is not true after fast page fault since the spte can be marked
writable between reading spte and updating spte. Like below case:

+------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| At the beginning::                                                     |
|                                                                        |
|	spte.W = 0                                                       |
|	spte.Accessed = 1                                                |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| CPU 0:                             | CPU 1:                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| In mmu_spte_clear_track_bits()::   |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|  old_spte = *spte;                 |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|  /* 'if' condition is satisfied. */|                                   |
|  if (old_spte.Accessed == 1 &&     |                                   |
|       old_spte.W == 0)             |                                   |
|     spte = 0ull;                   |                                   |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                    | on fast page fault path::         |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |    spte.W = 1                     |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    | memory write on the spte::        |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |    spte.Dirty = 1                 |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|  ::                                |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|   else                             |                                   |
|     old_spte = xchg(spte, 0ull)    |                                   |
|   if (old_spte.Accessed == 1)      |                                   |
|     kvm_set_pfn_accessed(spte.pfn);|                                   |
|   if (old_spte.Dirty == 1)         |                                   |
|     kvm_set_pfn_dirty(spte.pfn);   |                                   |
|     OOPS!!!                        |                                   |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

The Dirty bit is lost in this case.

In order to avoid this kind of issue, we always treat the spte as "volatile"
if it can be updated out of mmu-lock, see spte_has_volatile_bits(), it means,
the spte is always atomically updated in this case.

3) flush tlbs due to spte updated

If the spte is updated from writable to readonly, we should flush all TLBs,
otherwise rmap_write_protect will find a read-only spte, even though the
writable spte might be cached on a CPU's TLB.

As mentioned before, the spte can be updated to writable out of mmu-lock on
fast page fault path, in order to easily audit the path, we see if TLBs need
be flushed caused by this reason in mmu_spte_update() since this is a common
function to update spte (present -> present).

Since the spte is "volatile" if it can be updated out of mmu-lock, we always
atomically update the spte, the race caused by fast page fault can be avoided,
See the comments in spte_has_volatile_bits() and mmu_spte_update().

Lockless Access Tracking:

This is used for Intel CPUs that are using EPT but do not support the EPT A/D
bits. In this case, PTEs are tagged as A/D disabled (using ignored bits), and
when the KVM MMU notifier is called to track accesses to a page (via
kvm_mmu_notifier_clear_flush_young), it marks the PTE not-present in hardware
by clearing the RWX bits in the PTE and storing the original R & X bits in more
unused/ignored bits. When the VM tries to access the page later on, a fault is
generated and the fast page fault mechanism described above is used to
atomically restore the PTE to a Present state. The W bit is not saved when the
PTE is marked for access tracking and during restoration to the Present state,
the W bit is set depending on whether or not it was a write access. If it
wasn't, then the W bit will remain clear until a write access happens, at which
time it will be set using the Dirty tracking mechanism described above.

3. Reference
------------

:Name:		kvm_lock
:Type:		mutex
:Arch:		any
:Protects:	- vm_list

:Name:		kvm_count_lock
:Type:		raw_spinlock_t
:Arch:		any
:Protects:	- hardware virtualization enable/disable
:Comment:	'raw' because hardware enabling/disabling must be atomic /wrt
		migration.

:Name:		kvm_arch::tsc_write_lock
:Type:		raw_spinlock
:Arch:		x86
:Protects:	- kvm_arch::{last_tsc_write,last_tsc_nsec,last_tsc_offset}
		- tsc offset in vmcb
:Comment:	'raw' because updating the tsc offsets must not be preempted.

:Name:		kvm->mmu_lock
:Type:		spinlock_t
:Arch:		any
:Protects:	-shadow page/shadow tlb entry
:Comment:	it is a spinlock since it is used in mmu notifier.

:Name:		kvm->srcu
:Type:		srcu lock
:Arch:		any
:Protects:	- kvm->memslots
		- kvm->buses
:Comment:	The srcu read lock must be held while accessing memslots (e.g.
		when using gfn_to_* functions) and while accessing in-kernel
		MMIO/PIO address->device structure mapping (kvm->buses).
		The srcu index can be stored in kvm_vcpu->srcu_idx per vcpu
		if it is needed by multiple functions.

:Name:		blocked_vcpu_on_cpu_lock
:Type:		spinlock_t
:Arch:		x86
:Protects:	blocked_vcpu_on_cpu
:Comment:	This is a per-CPU lock and it is used for VT-d posted-interrupts.
		When VT-d posted-interrupts is supported and the VM has assigned
		devices, we put the blocked vCPU on the list blocked_vcpu_on_cpu
		protected by blocked_vcpu_on_cpu_lock, when VT-d hardware issues
		wakeup notification event since external interrupts from the
		assigned devices happens, we will find the vCPU on the list to
		wakeup.

Commit message:

KVM: Don't take mmu_lock for range invalidation unless necessary
Avoid taking mmu_lock for unrelated .invalidate_range_{start,end}()
notifications.  Because mmu_notifier_count must be modified while holding
mmu_lock for write, and must always be paired across start->end to stay
balanced, lock elision must happen in both or none.  To meet that
requirement, add a rwsem to prevent memslot updates across range_start()
and range_end().

Use a rwsem instead of a rwlock since most notifiers _allow_ blocking,
and the lock will be endl across the entire start() ... end() sequence.
If anything in the sequence sleeps, including the caller or a different
notifier, holding the spinlock would be disastrous.

For notifiers that _disallow_ blocking, e.g. OOM reaping, simply go down
the slow path of unconditionally acquiring mmu_lock.  The sane
alternative would be to try to acquire the lock and force the notifier
to retry on failure.  But since OOM is currently the _only_ scenario
where blocking is disallowed attempting to optimize a guest that has been
marked for death is pointless.

Unconditionally define and use mmu_notifier_slots_lock in the memslots
code, purely to avoid more #ifdefs.  The overhead of acquiring the lock
is negligible when the lock is uncontested, which will always be the case
when the MMU notifiers are not used.

Note, technically flag-only memslot updates could be allowed in parallel,
but stalling a memslot update for a relatively short amount of time is
not a scalability issue, and this is all more than complex enough.

Based heavily on code from Ben Gardon.

Suggested-by: Ben Gardon <bgardon@google.com>
Signed-off-by: Sean Christopherson <seanjc@google.com>
Message-Id: <20210402005658.3024832-10-seanjc@google.com>
Signed-off-by: Paolo Bonzini <pbonzini@redhat.com>

Documentation/virt/kvm/locking.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=================
KVM Lock Overview
=================

1. Acquisition Orders
---------------------

The acquisition orders for mutexes are as follows:

- kvm->lock is taken outside vcpu->mutex

- kvm->lock is taken outside kvm->slots_lock and kvm->irq_lock

- kvm->slots_lock is taken outside kvm->irq_lock, though acquiring
  them together is quite rare.

- The kvm->mmu_notifier_slots_lock rwsem ensures that pairs of
  invalidate_range_start() and invalidate_range_end() callbacks
  use the same memslots array.  kvm->slots_lock is taken outside the
  write-side critical section of kvm->mmu_notifier_slots_lock, so
  MMU notifiers must not take kvm->slots_lock.  No other write-side
  critical sections should be added.

On x86:

- vcpu->mutex is taken outside kvm->arch.hyperv.hv_lock

- kvm->arch.mmu_lock is an rwlock.  kvm->arch.tdp_mmu_pages_lock is
  taken inside kvm->arch.mmu_lock, and cannot be taken without already
  holding kvm->arch.mmu_lock (typically with ``read_lock``, otherwise
  there's no need to take kvm->arch.tdp_mmu_pages_lock at all).

Everything else is a leaf: no other lock is taken inside the critical
sections.

2. Exception
------------

Fast page fault:

Fast page fault is the fast path which fixes the guest page fault out of
the mmu-lock on x86. Currently, the page fault can be fast in one of the
following two cases:

1. Access Tracking: The SPTE is not present, but it is marked for access
   tracking. That means we need to restore the saved R/X bits. This is
   described in more detail later below.

2. Write-Protection: The SPTE is present and the fault is caused by
   write-protect. That means we just need to change the W bit of the spte.

What we use to avoid all the race is the Host-writable bit and MMU-writable bit
on the spte:

- Host-writable means the gfn is writable in the host kernel page tables and in
  its KVM memslot.
- MMU-writable means the gfn is writable in the guest's mmu and it is not
  write-protected by shadow page write-protection.

On fast page fault path, we will use cmpxchg to atomically set the spte W
bit if spte.HOST_WRITEABLE = 1 and spte.WRITE_PROTECT = 1, to restore the saved
R/X bits if for an access-traced spte, or both. This is safe because whenever
changing these bits can be detected by cmpxchg.

But we need carefully check these cases:

1) The mapping from gfn to pfn

The mapping from gfn to pfn may be changed since we can only ensure the pfn
is not changed during cmpxchg. This is a ABA problem, for example, below case
will happen:

+------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| At the beginning::                                                     |
|                                                                        |
|	gpte = gfn1                                                      |
|	gfn1 is mapped to pfn1 on host                                   |
|	spte is the shadow page table entry corresponding with gpte and  |
|	spte = pfn1                                                      |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| On fast page fault path:                                               |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| CPU 0:                             | CPU 1:                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ::                                 |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|   old_spte = *spte;                |                                   |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                    | pfn1 is swapped out::             |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |    spte = 0;                      |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    | pfn1 is re-alloced for gfn2.      |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    | gpte is changed to point to       |
|                                    | gfn2 by the guest::               |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |    spte = pfn1;                   |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ::                                                                     |
|                                                                        |
|   if (cmpxchg(spte, old_spte, old_spte+W)                              |
|	mark_page_dirty(vcpu->kvm, gfn1)                                 |
|            OOPS!!!                                                     |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------+

We dirty-log for gfn1, that means gfn2 is lost in dirty-bitmap.

For direct sp, we can easily avoid it since the spte of direct sp is fixed
to gfn.  For indirect sp, we disabled fast page fault for simplicity.

A solution for indirect sp could be to pin the gfn, for example via
kvm_vcpu_gfn_to_pfn_atomic, before the cmpxchg.  After the pinning:

- We have held the refcount of pfn that means the pfn can not be freed and
  be reused for another gfn.
- The pfn is writable and therefore it cannot be shared between different gfns
  by KSM.

Then, we can ensure the dirty bitmaps is correctly set for a gfn.

2) Dirty bit tracking

In the origin code, the spte can be fast updated (non-atomically) if the
spte is read-only and the Accessed bit has already been set since the
Accessed bit and Dirty bit can not be lost.

But it is not true after fast page fault since the spte can be marked
writable between reading spte and updating spte. Like below case:

+------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| At the beginning::                                                     |
|                                                                        |
|	spte.W = 0                                                       |
|	spte.Accessed = 1                                                |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| CPU 0:                             | CPU 1:                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| In mmu_spte_clear_track_bits()::   |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|  old_spte = *spte;                 |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|  /* 'if' condition is satisfied. */|                                   |
|  if (old_spte.Accessed == 1 &&     |                                   |
|       old_spte.W == 0)             |                                   |
|     spte = 0ull;                   |                                   |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                    | on fast page fault path::         |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |    spte.W = 1                     |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    | memory write on the spte::        |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |    spte.Dirty = 1                 |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|  ::                                |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |
|   else                             |                                   |
|     old_spte = xchg(spte, 0ull)    |                                   |
|   if (old_spte.Accessed == 1)      |                                   |
|     kvm_set_pfn_accessed(spte.pfn);|                                   |
|   if (old_spte.Dirty == 1)         |                                   |
|     kvm_set_pfn_dirty(spte.pfn);   |                                   |
|     OOPS!!!                        |                                   |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

The Dirty bit is lost in this case.

In order to avoid this kind of issue, we always treat the spte as "volatile"
if it can be updated out of mmu-lock, see spte_has_volatile_bits(), it means,
the spte is always atomically updated in this case.

3) flush tlbs due to spte updated

If the spte is updated from writable to readonly, we should flush all TLBs,
otherwise rmap_write_protect will find a read-only spte, even though the
writable spte might be cached on a CPU's TLB.

As mentioned before, the spte can be updated to writable out of mmu-lock on
fast page fault path, in order to easily audit the path, we see if TLBs need
be flushed caused by this reason in mmu_spte_update() since this is a common
function to update spte (present -> present).

Since the spte is "volatile" if it can be updated out of mmu-lock, we always
atomically update the spte, the race caused by fast page fault can be avoided,
See the comments in spte_has_volatile_bits() and mmu_spte_update().

Lockless Access Tracking:

This is used for Intel CPUs that are using EPT but do not support the EPT A/D
bits. In this case, PTEs are tagged as A/D disabled (using ignored bits), and
when the KVM MMU notifier is called to track accesses to a page (via
kvm_mmu_notifier_clear_flush_young), it marks the PTE not-present in hardware
by clearing the RWX bits in the PTE and storing the original R & X bits in more
unused/ignored bits. When the VM tries to access the page later on, a fault is
generated and the fast page fault mechanism described above is used to
atomically restore the PTE to a Present state. The W bit is not saved when the
PTE is marked for access tracking and during restoration to the Present state,
the W bit is set depending on whether or not it was a write access. If it
wasn't, then the W bit will remain clear until a write access happens, at which
time it will be set using the Dirty tracking mechanism described above.

3. Reference
------------

:Name:		kvm_lock
:Type:		mutex
:Arch:		any
:Protects:	- vm_list

:Name:		kvm_count_lock
:Type:		raw_spinlock_t
:Arch:		any
:Protects:	- hardware virtualization enable/disable
:Comment:	'raw' because hardware enabling/disabling must be atomic /wrt
		migration.

:Name:		kvm_arch::tsc_write_lock
:Type:		raw_spinlock
:Arch:		x86
:Protects:	- kvm_arch::{last_tsc_write,last_tsc_nsec,last_tsc_offset}
		- tsc offset in vmcb
:Comment:	'raw' because updating the tsc offsets must not be preempted.

:Name:		kvm->mmu_lock
:Type:		spinlock_t
:Arch:		any
:Protects:	-shadow page/shadow tlb entry
:Comment:	it is a spinlock since it is used in mmu notifier.

:Name:		kvm->srcu
:Type:		srcu lock
:Arch:		any
:Protects:	- kvm->memslots
		- kvm->buses
:Comment:	The srcu read lock must be held while accessing memslots (e.g.
		when using gfn_to_* functions) and while accessing in-kernel
		MMIO/PIO address->device structure mapping (kvm->buses).
		The srcu index can be stored in kvm_vcpu->srcu_idx per vcpu
		if it is needed by multiple functions.

:Name:		blocked_vcpu_on_cpu_lock
:Type:		spinlock_t
:Arch:		x86
:Protects:	blocked_vcpu_on_cpu
:Comment:	This is a per-CPU lock and it is used for VT-d posted-interrupts.
		When VT-d posted-interrupts is supported and the VM has assigned
		devices, we put the blocked vCPU on the list blocked_vcpu_on_cpu
		protected by blocked_vcpu_on_cpu_lock, when VT-d hardware issues
		wakeup notification event since external interrupts from the
		assigned devices happens, we will find the vCPU on the list to
		wakeup.
